could elect their own false delegates to this Congress. I tell you
now, the Lettish soldiers have many times said, 'No more
resolutions! No more talk! We want deeds-the Power must be in our
hands!' Let these impostor delegates leave the Congress! The Army is
not with them!"

The hall rocked with cheering. In the first moments of the session,
stunned by the rapidity of events, startled by the sound of cannon,
the delegates had hesitated. For an hour hammer-blow after
hammer-blow had fallen from that tribune, welding them together but
beating them down. Did they stand then alone? Was Russia rising
against them? Was it true that the Army was marching on Petrograd?
Then this clear-eyed young soldier had spoken, and in a flash they
knew it for the truth.... _This_ was the voice of the soldiers-the
stirring millions of uniformed workers and peasants were men like
them, and their thoughts and feelings were the same...

More soldiers ... Gzhelshakh; for the Front delegates, announcing that
they had only decided to leave the Congress by a small majority, and
that _the Bolshevik members had not even taken part in the vote,_ as
they stood for division according to political parties, and not
groups. "Hundreds of delegates from the Front," he said, "are being
elected without the participation of the soldiers because the Army
Committees are no longer the real representatives of the rank and
file...." Lukianov, crying that officers like Kharash and Khintchuk
could not represent the Army in this congress,-but only the high
command. "The real inhabitants of the trenches want with all their
hearts the transfer of Power into the hands of the Soviets, and they
expect very much from it!"... The tide was turning.

Then came Abramovitch, for the _Bund,_ the organ of the Jewish
Social Democrats-his eyes snapping behind thick glasses, trembling
with rage.

"What is taking place now in Petrograd is a monstrous calamity! The
_Bund_ group joins with the declaration of the Mensheviki and
Socialist Revolutionaries and will leave the Congress!" He raised
his voice and hand. "Our duty to the Russian proletariat doesn't
permit us to remain here and be responsible for these crimes.
Because the firing on the Winter Palace doesn't cease, the Municipal
Duma together with the Mensheviki and Socialist Revolutionaries, and
the Executive Committee of the Peasants' Soviet, has decided to
perish with the Provisional Government, and we are going with them!
Unarmed we will expose our breasts to the machine guns of the
Terrorists.... We invite all delegates to this Congress-" The rest was
lost in a storm of hoots, menaces and curses which rose to a hellish
pitch as fifty delegates got up and pushed their way out....

Kameniev jangled the bell, shouting, "Keep your seats and we'll go
on with our business!" And Trotzky, standing up with a pale, cruel
face, letting out his rich voice in cool contempt, "All these
so-called Socialist compromisers, these frightened Mensheviki,
Socialist Revolutionaries, _Bund_-let them go! They are just so much
refuse which will be swept into the garbage-heap of history!"

Riazanov, for the Bolsheviki, stated that at the request of the City
Duma the Military Revolutionary Committee had sent a delegation to
offer negotiations to the Winter Palace. "In this way we have done
everything possible to avoid blood-shed...."

We hurried from the place, stopping for a moment at the room where
the Military Revolutionary Committee worked at furious speed,
engulfing and spitting out panting couriers, despatching Commissars
armed with power of life and death to all the corners of the city,
amid the buzz of the telephonographs. The door opened, a blast of
stale air and cigarette smoke rushed out, we caught a glimpse of
dishevelled men bending over a map under the glare of a shaded
electric-light.... Comrade Josephov-Dukhvinski, a smiling youth with a
mop of pale yellow hair, made out passes for us.

When we came into the chill night, all the front of Smolny was one
huge park of arriving and departing automobiles, above the sound of
which could be heard the far-off slow beat of the cannon. A great
motor-truck stood there, shaking to the roar of its engine. Men were
tossing bundles into it, and others receiving them, with guns beside
them.

"Where are you going?" I shouted.

"Down-town-all over-everywhere!" answered a little workman,
grinning, with a large exultant gesture.

We showed our passes. "Come along!" they invited. "But there'll
probably be shooting-" We climbed in; the clutch slid home with a
raking jar, the great car jerked forward, we all toppled backward on
top of those who were climbing in; past the huge fire by the gate,
and then the fire by the outer gate, glowing red on the faces of the
workmen with rifles who squatted around it, and went bumping at top
speed down the Suvorovsky Prospect, swaying from side to side.... One
man tore the wrapping from a bundle and began to hurl handfuls of     l handfuls of     |          |
papers into the air. We imitated him, plunging down through the dark
street with a tail of white papers floating and eddying out behind.
The late passerby stooped to pick them up; the patrols around
bonfires on the corners ran out with uplifted arms to catch them.
Sometimes armed men loomed up ahead, crying "_Shtoi!_" and raising
their guns, but our chauffeur only yelled something unintelligible
and we hurtled on....

I picked up a copy of the paper, and under a fleeting street-light
read:
